hey guys
welcome to tonight's show
uh this is shop talk live um we are
doing a um
katonix for beginners segment under the
shop talk live
series
this is going to run every other week so
it'll be the second and fourth fridays
will be the katarnix for beginners
stuff and then the first and third
fridays of the month will be the regular
shop talk live series where we're out in
the quail room uh doing you know
hands-on project
projects and whatnot
um
i wanted to check first with you guys
and see
one how my audio is
and two i've got an air conditioner
running in the background let me know if
that's
uh too loud or too distracting and i'll
go ahead and shut that down
so
uh main reason behind this uh course
we're gonna call it uh is um
been getting an awful lot of uh beginner
questions
um and stuff over on facebook group page
here on the channel and uh i thought
it'd be a good idea actually i got some
uh requests to actually do this um but i
thought it'd be a good idea we can go
ahead and do this and make a separate
playlist
uh okay thanks mark thanks john thanks
valerie that's cool uh i don't have to
shut my air conditioner off because it i
got an air cond i got a incubator in
here now and it tends to get a little
bit too warm so
okay cool
um but anyhow um yeah i thought we'd go
ahead and get you know like a a beginner
series going that way we could have a
playlist uh on the channel
that uh
you know newbies can go to uh to review
the you know some of this information
and
uh kind of help them along in their coil
journey and then also we'll have the
regular shop talk live series that'll be
a separate playlist on the channel too
so
uh real quick i want to go over um
kind of like uh it's a little course
outline that i put together and this is
by no means um
you know set in stone it's probably
going to change i'll probably add stuff
to it you know as things go on uh but
this week's uh show is about getting
started uh we're going to talk about you
know a lot of things that you should do
prior to getting into keeping quail
uh you know some of the research that
needs to be done um some of the
equipment you need stuff like that we'll
be going over that shortly
some of the episodes that we'll be doing
next we're going to be doing one on
hatching eggs it's going to be
strictly one whole session just on
setting eggs getting prepared to set
your eggs and uh
different methods of hatching eggs uh
stuff like that then we'll do one on
incubators and incubation techniques uh
temperatures and humidity
uh preparing for lockdown that's a big
one uh
a lot of uh questions that i get um
you know are from people that don't
understand the difference between
incubating and lockdown so
that one should really help
uh let's see brooders um that's going to
be uh growing out chicks and brooders
we'll we'll be talking about uh the
different types of brooders whether you
want to you know start out with a
commercial model or uh build one
yourself which to me that seems to be
the most feasible method of doing it
we'll get into feeds and feeding
um housing and raising growths
different types of caging setups
stuff like that aviaries uh
graw cages layer cages stuff like that
um feather and vent sexing
uh cages and enclosures that kind of
goes along with the housing
uh selective breeding we're going to do
an entire
episode just on
what you want to look for
when you are selecting breeders whether
it's for meat and egg production
or if you are trying to you know better
a color variety or something
also culling we're going to do a whole
episode on culling birds uh what you
want to look for the birds that you want
to get out of your operation
stuff like that also we're going to talk
a little bit about promotion
and selling
and uh
just to give you some ideas on uh
you know to give you some ideas on what
you can do with your quail operation uh
whether i don't know how commercial you
know most you guys want to go
as far as my operation is concerned all
i really care about is selling enough
eggs to cover the cost of my feed i
really don't make very much money off my
coil but
i do usually have enough eggs to sell to
where i don't have to pay for feed out
of pocket
and then
each one of these classes is going to be
i don't know why i call them classes
each one of these segments is going to
be 30 minutes of talk or instruction
and then we will follow it up with a q a
up to an hour of q a so it's going to be
no more than 90 minutes for each one of
these uh kuturnik's for beginners
setups um
let's see
first off i want to i want to talk a
little bit about stuff that you should
already have or at least have plans on
getting prior to even ordering your
first set of eggs
let's see here
first thing is research now obviously if
you guys are watching these that is uh
you know
research you're trying to learn how to
how to keep the quail
what
stuff you need you know to be successful
with your quail
this is all stuff that you should
already know
prior to ordering your first set of
hatching eggs um there is
a lot of stuff that's going on
um around on the on the internet social
media and whatnot
on uh
um
how to keep quail and i see a lot of the
information out there i won't say that
it's totally wrong but some of it is you
know questionable
so i would uh
i would definitely talk with people that
have been doing this for a while you
know whether it's you know a reputable
breeder
or you know a hobbyist that's been in
the hobby for you know two three four
years uh just to kind of get a better
idea of what the consensus is on
um
stuff that you should already know
uh let's see
that doesn't look great
okay um we're gonna start out with uh
i'm gonna jump right into um where you
plan on keeping your your birds and like
i say this is all stuff that you wanna
have taken care of prior to
getting your first set of hatching eggs
so the first thing is um
where do you plan on keeping your quail
uh
whether you want to start out with a
commercially produced cage uh like the
hatching time cages here on the left uh
they're also you can get you know all
wire cages which you know would be
something like a winola ranch or if you
want to uh build your own cages you can
save a lot of money going that route
you can do wood frame cages you can
build your own wire cages there's
quite a few
paint in my arm for some reason
quite a few uh
different styles of cages that you can
put together and uh to keep your quail
in
uh next is
also aviaries aviary is another you know
option if you don't want to keep your
birds in a smaller
uh like a grow-out cage or a layer cage
you can always you know build an aviary
and have more of a naturalistic setting
some people have been successful in
getting their birds to go broody in an
aviary setup so that's another idea
uh let's see next thing um that you're
going to want to look into is incubators
um there are several different models of
incubators out there several different
companies that sell incubators
i
i like uh for the commercial incubators
um i like the burrato brands or the
brenzias um they seem like pretty
reliable uh incubators if you don't want
to get into
like this one here the real 49 i think
it's going to cost you around
i want to say between 350 and 400 bucks
and that's without the
the water pump
or the humidity pump
but another brand that they carry is
called the lumia 16
and that will do
up to 32 quail eggs
and it's it's a very good incubator i
have a egg set in it right now
it seems very stable
the nice thing about the burrado brands
is they come with their own egg turners
that are set to incubate multiple
species of eggs or different size eggs
um
but those are those are a couple
different ones like say brinji is a good
model some people have had luck with the
uh
the styrofoam like hufflebanders and
whatnot i don't use them anymore another
incubator that you might want to look
into is building your own i've had a lot
of success
with uh
the
diy incubator that we built here on the
channel that's the only incubator i've
used for the first two years of keeping
quail and they've done really well
uh next thing is uh is brooders
and again you can look at a
commercially produced brooder uh this is
another one a hatching times uh model
it's uh
i want to say three foot by
24 or 18 somewhere in there um
but uh when it comes to brooders i would
recommend sticking with something a
little more
uh inexpensive uh you can purchase these
plastic tubs uh they're made by
sterilite
and uh
james you might be right
maybe it is 64 quail eggs for the lumia
16.
i don't know why i was thinking 32. oh
the the lumia 8 is 32. thank you very
much james we appreciate that i
appreciate that lumia 16 is 64 eggs but
anyhow back to
brooders
you can pretty much you know make your
own brooder these plastic sterilite tubs
come in multiple sizes so depending on
the number of
chicks that you plan on hatching out at
a time
um you can you know adjust the size of
the router you could also make a brewer
you could take you know some plywood
just basically build you a box um
line your brooder with
you know paper towel or even a wire
floor like a quarter inch hardware cloth
floor
um and they'll do just fine in that
uh
next thing is uh you're gonna
want to have some type of a setup for
your grow-outs
and also some type of a setup for your
your layers
or your adult birds
again you can buy commercially produced
cages if you want or you can these are
some examples
of some all wire cages that i've built
in my shop
and they seem to be doing
a pretty good job so far
and you can really get into it
by building your own stuff you can
really save a lot of money
so that's another thing too you want you
want to kind of decide on how big you
actually want to get
i would recommend starting out smaller
than you know
planning on you know
we're going to go more into that but
start out smaller and then
figure out where you want to go for from
there
the next thing would be
a feed source you want to make sure
that you have
a source
for food you know visit some of the feed
stores make sure that you can
get the
proper food you know the starter the
grow out and the layer formula feeds
you know there's there's quite a few you
know you got tractor supplies pretty
much in every town uh but most towns
also have you know a private
owned a privately owned feed store uh
check with them you know and see what
they've got
uh
here's one of our local feed stores uh
this is where i get all the feed for my
adult birds
um
i end up i have to buy my uh
my starter feed from tractor supply
uh i can't get it from another feed
store but they're a little bit farther
away and they're actually a little bit
more money so i end up going to tractor
supply and that's where i get the uh
um
it's purina
game bird starter
and uh that does really well
but my this is where i buy all my grow
out feed and my layer feed
also you want to make sure that you have
an outlet
uh for your excess uh
products that you produce you know
whether it's eggs or meat birds or extra
roosters these are all things that you
want to keep in mind uh prior to you
know jumping in you know head first and
getting a bunch of quail
um you know whether you're gonna be
selling eggs for eating or hatching
um just you know think about where
you're going to be able to uh dump off
this stuff
um once you get to that point
um
okay
so that's uh oh a couple more things um
cleaning supplies uh you want to make
sure that uh let me bring up that other
uh thing again uh cleaning supplies you
know for keeping your cages clean i use
a pressure washer i pressure wash all my
cages i also uh spray them down with a
disinfectant
um that stuff you need a first aid kit
or medication for your bird since uh
if you have birds that get sick the
birds that get injured
you want to be able to uh take care of
them there and also if you're going to
be
selling eating eggs you might want to
look into getting egg trays
the plastic egg trays labels scissors
that you can offer to your customers and
another thing uh
think about where you're going to keep
all this stuff
while you're you know waiting for your
customers come and get it you know
whether you need a refrigerator for
storing eggs or freezer for storing meat
stuff like that so you uh you get the
idea on that
all right
so that pretty much covers that
now i want to uh
jump into this is all part of the
getting started
outline
you need to decide right off the bat
whether you want to
start with hatching eggs
or if you want to buy you know
chicks
you know maybe a week or two old shakes
or if you want to buy adult birds
if you do decide to go the live route
obviously you're going to need to have
your your housing and your uh caging's
all set up in advance
have source of feed for them all in
advance
but
what i would recommend for most people
is to start out with hatching eggs
there's two reasons for that one you are
eventually going to get into hatching
eggs either at the start or at the end
of your
journey with quail and by the by the end
i mean
when by the time your hens mature and
start laying eggs you're going to start
wanting to look into possibly hatching
out some more eggs out of your own lines
but
i recommend starting with hatching eggs
mainly because of the cost factor
it's a lot cheaper
to
you know start out with you know 60 eggs
or even 30 eggs and uh hatch them out if
something happens to where you know you
get a failed hatch or something just
doesn't go right it's a lot cheaper
out of your pocket to lose the money you
spent on hatching eggs compared to the
cost of losing um adult birds or birds
that are you know already grown
um what you want to do is look around
for
a reputable npip certified
breeder and npip is a national poultry
improvement plan and basically all that
means is
there's a group of npip testers in
pretty much every state that will come
to your farm or come to a breeder's farm
test their birds they're testing for
polarim typhoid and avian influenza or
a.i and that's what it means when you
see somebody says
we are npip and ai clean uh that's avian
influenza clean
um
let me see uh i want to bring up this
thing here real quick
you're also gonna want to decide what
types of birds you want to keep
whether it's a you know a meat and or
egg variety like the jumbo pharaohs
which are pictured here
or if you want to get into something a
little bit more out of the color
varieties uh that will
uh determine that the breeder and not
determine the breeder but
you'll have to find a breeder that
carries those uh
specific species
not species but colors that you want
whether they're the pharaohs or the
other color varieties
most of
the shippers today ship
usps
and
they pack them in these styrofoam
inserts which protect the eggs and keep
them from getting damaged while they are
in route to your place
most shippers will ship
priority or express mail
priority mail is going to be a little
bit cheaper and
usually takes about three days to get to
you
express mail
is on average two days i've seen it in
one day before
but uh
yeah that's what you can
expect as far as
how they ship it
another thing i want to look at is uh
average cost
for getting hatching eggs
the average cost right now for hatching
eggs is about 50 cents an egg on average
i mean sometimes you find a little bit
cheaper sometimes if it's a rare variety
it's going to be a little bit more
but it's 50 cents an egg or about a
dollar a bird and the reason i say a
dollar a bird is um you can pretty much
expect a 50
uh hatch rate
and so if you ordered 30 birds and 50 of
a hatch that would be 15
and if you paid 15 for the 30 eggs
it would
work out to be one dollar per bird if
that's what you got to hatch out
also
you can expect roughly
a 50 percent male to female ratio
so when you're placing your order
uh keep that in mind that we'll go back
to say you ordered 30 eggs again you got
15 of them to hatch out on average it's
going to be a 50 50 percent male to
female ratio so you will get you know
seven and a half hens or females and
seven and a half males so just kind of
keep that in mind that'll help you
determine the number of eggs that you're
going to need
to
hatch out in order to get the number of
females that you want
again i want to say on the first time
order order in smaller numbers try not
to uh
order you know too many you'd be much
better off starting out with excuse me
my mouth's getting dry
you'd be much better off starting with
30 or 60 eggs and if something goes
wrong you're not out a whole lot of
money versus if you were to you know
order you know 120 or 200 eggs at a time
so uh
um kind of keep that in mind
when you're placing your first order
another thing is make sure
that the
number of eggs you order is not going to
exceed the number of birds
that you are able to keep or want to
keep
i'm guilty of it myself i'll set a bunch
of eggs
and they'll all start hatching out and
pretty soon i've got more
eggs or more chicks than i have brooder
space and or when the brut when the
chicks are growing out in the grow out
cages um
i've got more chicks than i've got space
for in the growl cages
okay
next thing i want to talk about is uh
preparation uh prior to
ordering your eggs
uh well actually it's gonna be uh this
can be preparation after you order your
eggs but prior to receiving them
um what you wanna do is you wanna make
sure that your incubator
is
[Music]
prepared to accept the eggs
what you want to do is plug your
incubator in at least 24 hours prior to
the eggs showing up that way you can
make sure that your incubators are
brought up to temperature the
temperatures are stabilized you're able
to keep your humidity where you want it
you want to check your egg turners and
your hatching tray plug your egg turners
in make sure they're working uh hatching
trays
the only thing really to do on the
hatching trays is i line mine with a
shelf liner material
that just kind of helps
when the chicks do hatch out it uh gives
them a little bit better footing it also
kind of dampens if you accidentally bump
the uh
um
the hatching tray or if when chicks
start hatching out they're kind of
stumbling over all the eggs it just kind
of dampens that vibration a little bit
in there
okay so you you've got all your stuff
prepared at home and your eggs show up
at the door uh there are a few things
that you want to take care of with the
eggs prior to
setting them the incubator
and
that is you want to give the eggs a rest
period of about
12 to 24 hours probably 24 hours would
be the best um
depending on
uh the conditions that the eggs were
subject to during shipping
uh some eggs get you know bounced around
pretty hard or they're they're shipped
uh in in cold weather and you get the
eggs and they feel really really cold
in that case i would definitely go 24
hours
but if you get the eggs and they don't
seem like they're too cold the box
doesn't seem like it's been damaged or
anything you can probably get by with 12
hours and the reason
for the the rest period on the eggs is
on the large end of the egg is a an air
cell
and that air cell can become detached
uh when you uh or when they're in uh
transit uh the rough handling can make
that air cell come loose and it'll be
you know at any point in the egg so by
setting the eggs uh pointy end down i
think i actually have a
photo of that you want to set the eggs
like on a counter where they're not
going to be disturbed and in a area
that's not too hot or too cold room
temperature is usually pretty good 70 75
degrees is fine
that way you can bring them up to
temperature
you can position the eggs so the air
cell can rise up and hopefully reattach
on the large end of the egg that's just
gonna all that is going to help you get
better hatch rates
uh when you do
set your eggs for incubation
let's see what else i wanted to talk
about
also
before you place your eggs in the
incubator you want to make sure that you
double check your incubator temperatures
make sure there is no warm or cold spots
in there and this can all be checked
prior to the eggs even arriving that's
why i say fire your incubator up you
know a day or two early
that will give you time
to make sure you don't have warm or cold
spots temperatures are stable you can
get the humidity into the zone that you
want a lot to do with humidity
or a lot that affects humidity uh inside
your incubator is the outside
humidity in the room that the incubator
is in the relative humidity of that room
um
if you have a really high
humidity in the room
it's going to
most likely cause the
uh
humidity levels inside the incubator to
be a little bit higher
and on the other end if you have really
low
humidity in your room uh like if you
have an air conditioner running that
tends to dry out the air a little bit uh
it's going to affect your
humidity inside the uh the incubator
itself so you want to you just want to
kind of test that out the only way
you're going to get it perfect to wear
uh you would have to have a perfectly
climate controlled room that's the same
all the time
so those are those are some tests that
you want to run
prior to setting your eggs
okay so when you do go to set your eggs
the um
hatching time on the eggs is uh roughly
17 days
excuse me
um
but we do what's known as a 14-day
incubation
and then you put the eggs into lock down
for
um a three day period or until they
hatch and uh
the reason behind the lockdown i'm not
going to go into full lock time because
we're going to actually do a entire uh
talk on incubating and lockdown so we're
we're not going to go a whole lot into
that right now
another thing well that's going to
actually
go towards the next
video also so i think that i pretty much
covered most of the stuff as far as
getting started if you guys have any
questions
um about uh
other things to do with getting started
on your coil journey now guys also i
want you guys to keep in mind that this
whole
uh beginner series let me go ahead and
get back on that screen this whole
katarnix for beginner series is the bare
bones basics of
getting started with quail